Okay, so how do MVPs or minimum viable
products apply to accessibility,
especially if you are in
a waterfall system?
There is this well-known
concept in agile software
development of the minimum viable product,
or MVP.
And the idea is to produce iterations
of a product that meet a customer
need every step of the way.
As opposed to trying to get it all in,
in this mammoth
giant build that takes forever and
goes over budget, we wanna increment.
We wanna get to sort of a picture
this graphic on the screen,
where it's instead of single wheels
in the goal of building a car,
we go from a skateboard to a scooter
to a bike to a motorcycle to a car.
So it has less features, and maybe it
works slightly differently, but if we can
ship something that works to accomplish
at least part of a customer need,
then we can build on that.
And so, for accessibility,
I like that metaphor because
sometimes that's what we need to do.
We can't just go and rip everything out
and ship the perfect component fix,
sometimes you can.
Sometimes I can't even touch that part of
the code if it's not part of the ticket
that I'm working on, I work in a pretty
restrictive environment like that.
So we have to find ways that we can ship
things on time that are still accessible.
The unfortunate reality is that a lot
of early phase product launches don't
include accessibility.
I mean, it's the easiest way to get
people coming with torches to yell at you
on Twitter if you launch something
that doesn't have accessibility in it,
it's not great.
And it's because people are so
frustrated about this, they're like,
why can't we think about
accessibility earlier?
We hear things like, it's an alpha
version, don't worry about it,
we're just getting started,
we'll ship it later.
I mean, they're doing their best,
I understand, but
I think we can do better than that.
And so, part of my goal as I've matured
and learned, is when you point that stuff
out, be kind about it, the pitchforks and
torches are probably a bad idea.
Cuz we want people to learn about it,
we wanna be like, hey,
this is great,
I really like how you did this part.
I wish it had accessibility included
in the beginning because it would be
just more successful that way.
I think the challenge is that,
we do that over and over,
and it just is continually forgotten.
So if you're building an early
stage product, be a hero and
a champion [LAUGH] by
including accessibility early,
because you can incorporate it
into the DNA of the product.
You could potentially handle use cases
that would be really hard to add after
the fact.
And so, you do this by incorporating
accessibility in planning, in design,
not just like, dang, we caught it in QA,
now we have to go and try and
jam changes back into earlier parts of
the software development life cycle.
So there's a quote in the article
by Henrik Nyberg who wrote or
created that original MVP graphic.
He had the idea of,
what's the cheapest and
fastest way that we can
make something usable?
And I kind of took a spin on that and
thought what's the cheapest and
fastest way we can make
something usable and accessible?
Note, I have to do a big caution.
I am not talking about adding an overlay,
which is a one line of code fix that
claims to make your site accessible,
that is not what we're talking about here.
Cuz that's, yeah,
outside of the scope of this talk.
But I think if we can
create iterations and
phases where we kind of ship
something that's solid, but
just does fewer things and
then we build on that.
The next version of this will be more
interactive or we'll have one widget that
can do more functions instead of having
a toggle between two different views or
something like that.
Technical debt applies to
accessibility big time, and
it's why it becomes so
costly to do it later.
And parts of MVPs, some of those live
on in design decisions and code,
those early prototypes,
the work in progress.
How many times do you see WIP commits and
code that live on forever and
all kinds of projects.
So those decisions, I've actually heard
them described as layers of sediment,
which I thought was really interesting.
Yeah, kind of a nature theme to think
about, or tree rings, or something, and
it's like these decisions live on.
And so, if we make decisions early on
about how we architect our frontend code,
in particular,
we can make it easier for ourselves.
Cuz it is hard to recover from this
debt without significant re-imagining,
re-platforming, and
essentially starting over.
So just do less,
if you can't make it accessible, do less.
Add a widget that people can toggle
between, if you have a really fancy
table that you can sort, but
it only works for mouse users,
provide an alternative format that's easy
to get to, that's pleasant to all users.
We don't wanna ship people
off to text-only, boring,
non-maintained sites, but
it is okay to have lower five versions,
especially early on, that then you go and
iterate on and improve.
Make it part of your culture,
make it an accountability culture
that's friendly, not cutthroat.
[LAUGH] But I think the culture piece
is what's missing a lot of the time.
So, how do we do this?
In the software development lifecycle,
as I was saying,
we wanna tackle it earlier
than catching it in QA.
So, we wanna consider accessibility
earlier, what we call shifting left,
cuz we wanna consider it and planning,
design, engineering, content strategy.
Basically any time that decisions
are being made about what users
are going to see and experience,
if we can plan ahead of time,
we could prevent some re-work, some cycles
of the feedback loop of, does it work?
And we test it, goes to QA,
we feel like start over, just that loop,
you can cut that down.
It gets really hard when
some of the things you
have to change are really core to
the product like brand colors.
If you can't make colors past visual
contrast ratios without changing it so
much that your orange looks brown,
you just can't fiddle,
you can't tweak those colors
enough to make that work.
You have to go back to your design
team and your brand people,
and try to come up with a solution
that can be hard with T-Mobile pink,
or some color like that, pink and white,
the pink can't get any pinker, that's it.
Or if your whole app is
built in HTML5 Canvas,
that's kind of hard to change and
very hard to make accessible.
There were some claims that you could
do that, but it's just not the same.
I'm a Figma,
that's what they're dealing with.
That's a Canvas-based application that
is very hard to go in and change.
They're working on it, bless them.
They're awesome, but that's hard.
And so, we'll have the most success
when we consider it earlier.
All right, we're doing this in Canvas,
should we?
What are we gonna do to
make this accessible?
That's a tough thing to overcome later on.
So what kinds of things need
to be addressed in design?
I mean, contrast, colors, that was one.
I mean, you could be assigned
a drag-and-drop widget that to
make it accessible,
we're going to work on one later.
And I happen to know from working on
those that sometimes you have to change
the design to make it work.
And design might have already
been signed-off on months ago,
depending on how your process works,
it could be a totally different company
that made that, so that can be hard.
So, yeah, some things like, you can only
finesse it so much as a dev, you have to
understand that you might need to open up
some design cycles to really get it right.
And so, yeah, just keep that in your mind,
in the back of your mind when you're doing
sprint planning, you're thinking about how
is this work gonna get done, yeah,
know that you might need some design help.
And so, we had some kind of questions,
thoughts around how to convince
stakeholders, because it's the stuff
people don't always wanna do.
There is a bit of an art to this, and
depending on what motivates people,
that's part of what makes it an art, is
like finding out what matters to people.
Some people might respond to a carrot,
some people might respond
better to a stick.
And so, those approaches, it's kind of
exhausting having to think about that.
But if we wanna get this work done right,
sometimes we have to think about this.
So what do people care about?
Legal risk and compliance,
maybe, lost revenue,
possibly, brand reputation,
that could be a big one.
So my strategy is to tackle these
tasks and phases, find easy wins,
find things you've already done, and
you can say, hey, look, we did this and
you didn't even notice.
Think about,
if we put a little bit more emphasis here,
how much more we could get done?
And here are some prioritized
issues at least a quick pass at
that to think about how much work we need
to do, make it easy for them to say yes.
So that's what I would do anyway,
especially as a tech lead.
And when you combine that with kind of the
MVP approach of having something that you
can do in phases, something that
works every step of the way.
Or at least, you're gonna
tackle it the next sprint, and
you have it scheduled, it's not
just gonna languish in the backlog,
that's how you can chip away at it.
But I think the reality is, accessibility
often is fixed long after something is
launched, cuz people go,
dang, I didn't know [LAUGH].
So sometimes that's what
you'll be dealing with and
it's kind of the same process though, you
still have to break it down into parts.
You still have to schedule it, figure
out what the scope and estimates are,
all that.
So to help you prioritize some
heuristics that I would think about for
prioritization include,
what's the accessibility impact of issues.
You can find all kinds of little
tweaky issues, but some of them might
be WCAG AAA and, or maybe they're
kind of your personal bias or
your personal thought of
how something should work.
Really consider how blocking is this?
Can someone complete this if they
really can't use a mouse and
their focus dial is lost,
are they going to be lost?
Yeah, probably, that happens to be,
I think, a level A criterion in WCAG.
So, yeah, what's the impact?
If there is a WCAG criterion for
web content accessibility guidelines,
there's three levels, level A, AA, AAA.
Level A is absolutely yes,
you must meet it.
AA is also absolutely yes, usually.
AAA is, well, if you can meet that great,
but usually AA is what we're aiming for.
So that can help you kind of gauge how
that works and test with users too,
if you think someone is blocking,
if you can have someone test it,
who knows, that's really great input also.
Analytics and metrics, so
we can't track screen reader users for
privacy reasons, but we do have traffic
metrics that we can see usually,
are these core user
flows that these are on?
How much traffic talking about here
cuz that could be really impactful?
If people can't check out,
they can't buy a mortgage or whatever,
that's a problem, you're gonna lose
a sale, you're gonna lose some business,
that is what Target got sued for,
their checkout button was not accessible.
And so, they've changed their culture
now as a result, which is really cool.
But which browsers and platforms?
Are there any areas that need more help?
I was saying,
do you need more design help?
And then the cost of not doing it,
I'm not an MBA, but
I could probably break it down into
coming up with some scary estimate.
[LAUGH] Or sorry, not scary, a helpful
estimate of the cost of not doing it,
that's what you could make scary.
Like, hey, if we do this, these
are the benefits, if we don't do this,
here's the scary estimate.
But we'll talk a lot more about
organizational skill building a little
bit later.
So accessibility personas,
especially in the design phase planning,
thinking about who our users are.
This is one of the earliest times that
people with disabilities are marginalized
out of the process.
And there's no thought or
care into how someone would use
a screen reader or use a keyboard.
And so, sometimes that can be part of
your planning phase, your design phase,
to think about, how is this gonna work?
What would our customer be doing,
if we're a bank?
Yeah, blind people have bank accounts.
Blind people do all kinds of things.
So including your customers in
accessibility personas can be helpful.
And while personas are not real people,
they do represent your users,
people using your product,
buying your services.
So I have some examples, because there
is a lot of really great expertise
that's been shared over
the last couple of decades.
There's some from the UK Government
Digital Service, from Stanford,
book called A Web for Everyone that weaves
personas throughout, that's really great.
I found these personas on the Figma
community, part of the Figma as well.
And I have the cover of that on the slide,
but
there's a whole series
of personas in there.
So you could see kind of how do people
approach that, I think we can benefit from
the wisdom that's been shared by
people in the Accessibility community.
So you can share that with your
design partners and colleagues.